When a spy chief steps down, everyone
wants to know what they think, how they
see the world around us. Until a few
weeks ago, Richard Moore was the head of
Britain's Secret Intelligence Service,
the UK equivalent of the CIA. It's a job
that he held for 5 years, dealing in
that time with threats from Russia to
China, from Iran to counterterrorism,
and then this year with a new
administration in Washington. That's the
story that he tells me in this next
conversation, and it includes his own
personal story, how this career began
with a tap on the shoulder.
Welcome. Thank you for doing this,
Richard. Um until 6 weeks ago, your
daily work involved reading highly
classified intelligence, and I wonder if
therefore I could start with the here
and now. And your perception of the
world, what you see as you look around
the world today that me and
most people watching or listening to
this might not see. Well, thank you,
Michelle. It's lovely to be here. Um as
I reflect, yes, few weeks on, um I think
we're in a I've said this before, an
extraordinarily contested international
environment. I don't think in, you know,
38 years of of um being a being an
intelligence officer and a diplomat,
I've seen it um less well ordered.
Uh there's just an extraordinary number
of loose ends, if you like, on the
international scene, and we might, you
know, talk about some of those in a bit
more detail, like Ukraine or or what
happens next in Gaza or over Iran. There
are so many of these. And unfortunately,
the way in which uh relationships have
have broken down uh between leading
powers, particularly following Russian
behavior in Ukraine, and but also,
difficult relationship and after all
between Washington and Beijing.
Um some of the some of the tramlines
that we were used to in the in the years
after 1945 are not really there to
manage some of this contestation. So, uh
one thing I said as I left the job after
5 years is that I certainly haven't left
the world in a better place than I found
it, and I'm lucky that wasn't in my job
description, but
>> More contested means more dangerous, we
should be clear.
>> Well, it's a
There's definitely dangers in the world
as we look at them, and they can
suddenly loom out of the mist at you.
And the fact that you said that
relationships fraying is a part of this,
and you mentioned that the relationship
between Washington and Beijing. So, that
has really happened much more this year,
hasn't it, with the Trump
administration?
Does How does that play into what what
you've already made clear has been the
case on
your old agency and the CIA's perception
of China, that it's the major
intelligence challenge of the 21st
century?
Uh I think there's been really um
issues around this relationship for some
time, and in particular, I think um the
the the rupture of of normal diplomatic
contact that happened during the
pandemic. I mean, for a number of years,
senior Chinese and senior Americans just
didn't meet. And that's a worrying
thing, you know, and you want as an
intelligence officer uh where you can
see the dangers of things um
of miscalculation, those sort of issues.
You want the diplomats, you want the
leaders to be talking more regularly.
Now, you know, the fact that President
Trump and President Xi met recently,
that that's helpful. Um
the the tariffs is the current issue
between them, but I mean, there there
are clearly any number of rub points
between the US and China and between the
US's allies and and China. And can help
me understand how you see China, because
I know you've talked about China as an
opportunity and a threat, and that
combination is quite hard for people
like me and perhaps other outsiders to
get our heads around. So,
it it just has a complexity within it
that I imagine makes it hard for someone
like you to help formulate policy. How
is a government supposed to deal with a
company as a country as both an
opportunity and a threat? So, I mean, I
think the starting point when I talk
about opportunity and threat is partly
because of the nature of intelligence is
that people often assume,
understandably, that we're all about
threats. And if you look at an
organization like MI5, that's primarily
what they're there to do is to manage
the threats.
>> The domestic intelligence agency in the
UK.
>> of the UK or the,
FBI in in America, etc. But a foreign
intelligence
intelligence service like my former
service, MI6, is there to to gather
intelligence on a number of global
issues, and some of that intelligence is
used by ministers and senior officials
to exploit opportunities as well as to
manage threats. That's my
>> That's what you meant by opportunity and
threat, that it's an opportunity to
gather intelligence and it is a No, it's
not it's it's it's you gather
intelligence to enable your political
leadership to seize opportunities, which
may be upside ones, is my point. It's
not all it's not all about managing
threats. And with China, clearly, you
know, this is a huge and powerful uh
country. It's a reemerged onto the
international scene, and its values and
interests certainly don't overlap always
with with our own. So, you know, you are
looking at it um if you are the Prime
Minister of Great Britain or the
President of the United States about how
do you manage that relationship in a way
that that means you secure UK interests.
And for me, that means you are pretty
robust at home, you are pretty robust
about um
uh trying to deny and then and then to
um to tackle any behavior aimed at your
own country, whether that is espionage
or cyberattacks, etc. And does that
happen all the time? Uh it it's pretty
it's pretty relentless. Yeah.
>> So, what did you think of the collapse
of the recent case against two
individuals, two British men who were
accused of spying for China? Well, what
I what I'll say on that is very clearly
um but I'll repeat what I just said,
which is that China is intent on
gathering uh intelligence on the UK, and
we have to recognize that. And Ken
McCallum, the the Director General of
MI5, um has has spoken about that. He
said he was frustrated. Well, I'm I
think he like him, I don't think I'll be
drawn on an individual case. That's for
the lawyers to resolve. But um it it's
certainly the case that um they're
active in the space. But And if you
can't and if you can't take people to
task
>> and if you can't take people to task for
acting in that space, that was the
accusation against those two men, then
where does it leave you as a country?
What are your levers? What what I'll say
on that, Michelle, is clearly, if if you
are spying for a foreign power against
the United Kingdom and you are caught,
then you should expect to, you know, to
receive the consequences of that action.
You will understand also why I tend to
discourage politicians from being too
moralistic about the issue of spying in
itself. The UK has rather effective uh
intelligence organizations, and we are
actively um gathering intelligence
against other countries. I think where
you have to be less tolerant is the sort
of hybrid warfare activity that we're
seeing from Russia, arson, attempted
assassinations. That crosses a very
different line for me. But against all
of these, uh MI5, with our help and with
GCHQ's help and with help of our allies,
is trying to detect and deter that type
of activity.
>> Yeah. So, just on language, just so I
understand how you see China and
therefore perhaps [clears throat] how
you suggest we should see it. Do you see
China as an active national security
threat? I think clearly, China is
involved in activities which threaten
our interests, and we should be very
robust in pushing back against those. Um
and they would expect us to do so, to be
honest. And Beijing
uh respects strength in this space. So,
I think it is both the right thing to do
and also is the practical and good thing
to do. And I've always noticed when
countries have had sort of set-tos with
China, um
it doesn't always impact on trade.
Sometimes trade goes up. Do you remember
when David Cameron um met the Dalai
Lama, and this caused a a big sort of
to-do with with China. As I understand
it, our trade figures went up after that
incident. So, stick to your values and
say
>> What would you do with the Chinese
Embassy? The plan for the new mega
embassy would be the largest embassy in
Europe on the edge of the city of
London. Again, what I would what I would
say on this is that, you know,
countries obviously have to have
embassies. So, there's clearly, you
know, we we need one in Beijing. Um and
it's important that we have that for all
those reasons I said to you about um
having channels open and being able to
communicate. So, it's right and proper
that the Chinese should get uh get their
get their embassy, whether it's this one
or not isn't really not um for me to
judge.
>> it's it's a particularly big one. It is
going to be an enormous site.
>> I'm not there to justify, you know, its
size or, you know, what what it what it
does, but, you know, it it is
I'm sure there has to be a way through
where they get an appropriate embassy
and we are allowed to um retain and
develop our own um excellent embassy in
Beijing.
>> Okay. I do want to know about how this
journey of your professional life of 40
years, nearly 40 years,
>> Nearly 40 years to make your way
>> how it all began. So, to cast your mind
right back um
to your recruitment. How did that happen
in the early 1980s? I'm afraid I am an
almost stereotypical example of what is
sometimes referred to as a tap on the
shoulder, Uh and what's more at Oxford
so
one an academic and let me even now I
won't I won't name who they were, but an
academic approached me and
they knew that I was interested in a
career and I was looking at the Foreign
Office potentially as
as a route as a career as well as your
former employer BBC
who rejected me without an interview
Michelle. Something I have often Well,
I'll tell you what I'll tell you what
I'll throw back at that is that when I
left university I was not eligible to
enter the service that you led because
both my parents were not born in the UK.
In fact, neither of my parents were born
in the UK. No, and thank goodness we've
changed that as we have also changed the
method of approaching people,
but it was
>> happen anymore the tap on the shoulder
No, he's I remember him saying you know
would would you be interested in a
career in an alternative field of
of foreign affairs. I must have been a
very naive 20 year old. I didn't have a
clue what he meant.
But one thing led to another. I got a
letter and I got a So was that academic
at Oxford? Was he in the service? Was
that his No, no, no, in those days no,
no, no, no, in those days there was
a very kind of informal set of what we
call talent spotters and their job was
to look at bright people coming through
and who who who they thought you know
they might be suitable for our peculiar
line of work and and he you know picked
me and I have no idea maybe he picked
others and occasionally I meet uh
very
senior people in public life
um who it's always this kind of they
come into my office and they they sort
of and it's really funny how they're
still very scared about it and they look
around and they check no one's there and
then they they declare that they were
approached and for one reason or another
they chose not to come in. Or they
didn't make the grade maybe. Well, it
for all those very distinguished people
almost certainly in the first category.
Um but did you hesitate once you
realized what the world's alternative
career meant? What did you think? I know
your father was a
Foreign Office man so you knew that
world.
But spying?
Yeah, I I I thought long and hard about
I mean you can imagine I was
intrigued by it. I thought it would be
exciting. I didn't know very much. I
mean in those days they told you
virtually nothing.
Um so I I think coming into it it was a
bit more of a punt than it would be
today. I did think about it and
um because I I thought about the issues
which
you know I are involved in it which you
know which are quite difficult involving
a degree of deception. So I thought
about it, but I think having done some
conversations and been encouraged by
people including
my wonderful father who who is very you
know is
so straight down the line and
a man of towering integrity and he has
many friends and many friends within the
service. So I kind of thought and my mom
was cheering me on. So between that I I
decided to give it a go. But the the
hesitation I get the impression is not
so much then about living your life with
secrecy as you then had to do from most
people. The deception as in
what what did that mean?
Well
living a life of of secrecy as you put
it requires a degree of deception
because
>> not being honest with people around you.
Yeah, some close friends,
members of the wider family are not
aware of what you're doing for a living.
And so
uh yeah, you have to be comfortable with
that
along with the character traits of also
if you're desperate for recognition for
what you do, this is not the right
profession to go into. You you've got to
be satisfied with the intrinsic
importance of the mission and the and
the motivating power of that mission.
You've got to be satisfied with the the
comradeship the the
the teamwork that goes with the people
who are in the know and but you can't go
down to the pub at the end of the
weekend have a brag about it to your
mates. And you have to be ready for
people to see your life as a kind of
boring desk job a lot of the Indeed,
including your children for the early
part of their lives. Until this gray man
in the Foreign Office So when
when and how did you tell your children?
So it it varies from family to family.
It's a big decision because once you
tell them, of course you're pulling them
within that circle of knowledge and
you're putting something on them. They
then become complicit in in going. So
you you you think about it. In our case
I think we we decided when our kids were
in their kind of early mid-teens. Seemed
the right moment to do it.
>> And the words you used were? Well, it's
really funny Michelle because here I was
I remember with my son I I can't tell
the full story. I can only do it as a
private thing. I can't do it broadcast,
but I'll give you some highlights of it.
But fundamentally you know I should by
that stage I'm an experienced
intelligence officer. I have learned to
to pitch people to put the question to
them to try and say you know say will
you know will you work with us
and I you know been trained to do that.
Completely and utterly messed it up with
my own son. So the service and first of
all Maggie and I made the mistake of
sitting there and looking slightly
nervous and solemn in front of him. So
of course I could see in his eyes he was
he thought we were about to announce our
divorce. So then I started to gabble in
front of the you know in front of him
and just it just sort of spewed out in
the end and he kind of looked at me oh
god thank god for that and said
something which is unprintable.
>> [laughter]
>> But Maggie your wife knew all along I
think cuz you've known each other since
you were very young. Yes, so exactly
that's unusual in that when I joined the
service albeit at 24 we were already
married by then. So it was very much all
of those you know thinking through the
issues was done of course chatting it
through with Maggie as well.
But think again of colleagues who
do begin a romantic
attachment and at some point they too
because they can't just say it on the
first date
at some point they too have to find
having
checked in with the office with the
service they have to find the right time
to say they might have not have been
entirely honest in that first phase of
the relationship and that's that's the
And then what happens if the
relationship doesn't last then you've
got someone out there in the wider world
they do, but so yeah, so if you're going
to split up then do it amicably as
possible. I think would be the advice.
Um I want to ask about what spycraft is
actually like because look the time when
you went into the service you will have
read John le Carré and presumably Ian
Fleming you know all of that kind of the
classic things people know. Was it
actually like that?
So
this is a terrible admission to make on
air Michelle, but when I came into the
job I hadn't read a single Ian Fleming
novel. So I'm desperately putting that
right and reading my way through them. I
had read le Carré.
Um I now put Mick Herron right up there
in the pantheon alongside le Carré. I
think he's a brilliant The Slow Horses
books, yeah. Yeah, The Slow Horses book.
Many people will be more familiar
perhaps with the TV than they are the
books, but the books are fantastic.
So
there's just a massive difference.
These are works of
works of fiction, works of creativity.
Um clearly with le Carré there was you
know he spent a
short period in in the service so there
was some verisimilitude particularly to
his portraits of
early Cold War Berlin and and all the
rest of it. Um and occasionally you will
see references to tradecraft in them and
sometimes it's accurate and sometimes it
isn't, but look it's very different. Of
course it's very different in real life,
but but occasionally there is
a degree of intrigue and excitement
which touches over into that world,
yeah. Isn't there a degree also of um
seeing the use in people and then using
them? When you identify people you are
you are trying to work out how they can
further Britain's interests and trying
to get to them in one way or another.
You you you are clearly trying to forge
a relationship with another human being
um because you need secrets that they
possess, yeah. And therefore that if you
think through it means you have to
create a relationship of real intimacy
and trust with them because you're often
asking them to take risks in order to to
gather that intelligence and share it
with you
which are significant and they won't do
it unless they can look at you and think
this is a person who is is professional.
They're they're going to be competent in
the managing of this relationship and
they will also they'll be looking for
something else. They'll be looking for
something they can trust. They'll be
looking for the values in in that space.
So yeah, it's very powerful because you
are about to enter into a relationship
where there's a huge amount at stake. I
mean
sometimes the case officers will be
putting themselves in in harm's way in
that relationship, but nothing like that
of the secret agent the person who's
agreed to do it. And sometimes you're
offering money or are you often offering
money? I mean I what I what I can say on
that space is very obviously when people
are going to come and talk to you and
take those sort of risks, they're going
to be driven by different motivations
and our job is not to be particularly
judgmental frankly about those
motivations to try and work out
something that works for both parties
and if that involves some financial
compensation yeah, of course we'll do
that.
Um but I I wonder whether it
means that you start to see people in a
certain way or whether ever you worry
whether you ever worried about your
perception of people. My my grandfather
worked in intelligence for about a year.
The reason he left it
um was because he said he he felt it
made you suspicious of everyone.
So, I I think it's a it's a really
profoundly important point. And when
we're looking to recruit people,
uh the sort of people who will be
successful in this world, they have to
be really centered individuals. They
have to really know themselves, and they
have to be very low ego.
Uh because precisely for those reasons,
you are going to be bouncing up against
some really difficult ethical situations
in this work. So, you better be very
well grounded.
>> the people like you, the intelligence
officers, not the not the agents that
you recruit in different countries.
>> I I'm I meant the people within MI6.
Yes, absolutely. They need to be in that
place so that you don't get, you know,
what what you're describing there as a
sort of, you know, a drift over time
into
doing stuff that you would have regarded
as unacceptable. And therefore, you
know, people are very thoughtful. I
mean, I throughout my career, I've I've
I've really thought about these things.
These things are important. And we,
you know, within the organization,
uh we give people space to think through
this. The people have personal crisis of
conscience on this. It's very important
they come, you know, that they work it
out, um you know, within the circle of
secrecy, as you can imagine. Did you
ever have an agent who you'd recruited
and developed who then was arrested or
or worse in another country? Well, I I'm
going to I'm going to distance it a bit
from from me because I don't want to
talk about things that I did in case it
because I'm very very averse to giving
any clues as to who might have worked
with me in the past. But, of course,
from time to time,
uh that is bound to happen. You know,
our our commitment to people is to keep
them safe. And we will bend over
backwards to do that.
But, um you know, in history, um for
reasons sometimes unconnected with what
MI6 does,
um circumstances will lead to to their
arrest. And it's a very difficult moment
um because we really, you know, we root
for those people.
Uh they are why we exist as a human
intelligence service. And it's very
painful when it happens. But, it it
doesn't happen very often because we are
very very careful.
And you have to be good readers of
people, I imagine. When you reveal
yourself to someone, you have to be very
confident.
>> And you have to have you you definitely
have to have that. And you have to have
the set of values which they recognize.
If If If people If you had a reputation
of just using and abusing people,
they're not going to choose to come and
talk to you, are they? Or when you
approach them, they're going to say a
very abrupt no.
Um but, they know with with MI6 that
they will get uh care and attention. And
uh you know, we'll we'll we'll look
after them. Can I talk then about
something that might have been a test or
almost certainly was a test of exactly
what you're saying. And it's the period
after 9/11, Mhm. when the US and the UK
worked very closely together.
The US carried out torture
on detainees. We knew that from the
Feinstein-led report, the US Senate
report in 2014. And the UK
MPs found later on in their own report,
went along with it.
So, I'm I'm not sure I I recognize the
characterization you've just given. I
mean, we're
clearly very close to the US. I worked
through that period, um including on
difficult counterterrorism work,
including in in Islamabad. I was there
uh when the very first al-Qaeda bombs
developed in that my daughter daughter
[clears throat] was in a kindergarten
whose windows were blown in by a bomb
which exploded in the Egyptian
embassies. So, I was right in the midst
of all that, um
Michelle. And it's very clear that the
US administration at the time
uh did a whole pile of things which uh
were utterly unacceptable. You know, we
all know about waterboarding, you know,
which is clearly But, did you know about
it at the time?
>> No, because they were very very careful
to exclude us. They they absolutely
did not tell their UK counterparts You
see, that's not that's not really what
came out in the in the MPs' report here
in the UK after 3 years of looking into
it. Their finding was that the UK
tolerated inexcusable treatment of US
detainees. And that did involve
waterboarding, stress positions, sleep
deprivation, being in coffin-sized
boxes.
And the MPs said it was beyond doubt
that the UK knew how the US handled some
detainees. So, I I'm not sure I agree
with beyond doubt in those terms because
I was there, and they were not.
So, it's not that I, you know, their
description of the activity is perfectly
valid. And I I I agree with that.
And uh we, of course, um
let's be clear. We we deal with partners
around the world who employ methods that
we would not countenance. And we're very
careful that in our engagement with
them, that we do not facilitate or
enhance that type of behavior. The MPs
pretty thorough. British agencies
continue to supply intelligence despite
knowing or suspecting abuse in more than
200 cases.
>> Michelle, I'm I'm Michelle, I'm not you
you we're taking it into slightly
different areas. You know, did the did
the relationship continue with the
Americans? And therefore, did we pass
material uh as described by the MPs?
Undoubtedly. Were the lessons learned
about that? Absolutely. There is now an
entire compliance process around us led
by the Investigatory Powers Commission.
That doesn't happen unless one
recognizes that there were mistakes
made. So, let me I mean, I don't want to
give the impression that I'm not
accepting it. I am. I'm just saying, you
know, we were starting about individuals
and where they were individually. And
I'm trying to make the point that as
individual officers, including me at the
time, no, I did not realize that my US
counterpart was involved in that type of
activity. Um otherwise, I would I would
have not approached it in the same way.
You know, might I, you know,
Is there an argument that we should have
been better at um earlier at um working
out that things were going on that we we
would not do? Yeah, of course. I accept
that completely.
Uh I'm not trying to resist that. I was
just trying to resist any kind of
implication that individuals within the
MI6
were complicit in this uh because if
they had been, they would be in jail.
And not a single uh MI6 officer has been
prosecuted for this. And I'm very proud
of that. That's not because they weren't
caught, Michelle. It's because they have
that set of values that I described um
earlier on. Let's bring it up to the
present day then. Sure. Um
if you grab these headphones, I want to
play you a little of a very um striking
appearance that you made while you were
in office at MI6 when you appeared on a
stage with the FT um speaking to the
Financial Times editor, Roula Khalaf,
with your then US counterpart, Indeed.
William Burns. And this is part of what
you said. I think our partnership does
matter enormously to both of our
services, but I think also to both of
our countries.
We have no better foreign partner in the
world, my agency doesn't, than SAS. We
will share more with each other than we
will do with anyone else
because of the high levels of trust that
built up over many, many years. The
partnership goes back in one form or
another over a century.
So, that was you in September 2024.
Indeed. What were the last 9 months of
your service like with the Trump
administration?
So, uh
Bill um moved out, of course. He was a
wonderful colleague, Bill Burns. And
uh
one of the great sort of public servants
of the of the US in in recent decades.
And he uh was replaced by uh a gentleman
called John Ratcliffe, who has been an
excellent partner. And
uh clearly you get changes of
administration uh in the in Washington.
You get changes of government uh in the
UK. And in in my case, rather too many.
Uh leaving aside the politics, just the
the sheer number of prime ministers,
foreign secretaries that that I dealt
with in my 5 years. So, that moves on,
but the partnership remains the most
critical one for our two nations. And
the people called upon to steward that
relationship, the the chief of MI6 and
the director of CIA, work very, very
hard on that relationship. Are you
suggesting there's been no change at
all? Because there was a very obvious
practical change where in March, the US
suspended intelligence sharing with
Ukraine for a bit. So,
that was an indication of a very
different era. William Burns himself has
characterized this period in the US as
being a really difficult one. That it's
that the
sacking of officials, including
intelligence officials, has been about
retribution rather than reform.
All I you know, what what I can say on
that is that the relationship continues
to be really important and strong one.
And I work really hard on it. You know,
all relationships evolve. They change.
The personalities change. The policies
change. And you, you know, when you're
chief of MI6, you deal with the world as
it is. And get on with it. But, help me
understand how
>> You you you use your influence, don't
you? So, Ukraine is a good example
where, you know, we have very clear
views in the UK about prosecuting that
war and and how to support the
Ukrainians.
And, you know, our voice is one that is
listened to uh in Washington.
Things change, move around a bit. Um
that's the style of the current
administration. But, we are always
there. And it's our responsibility to
use that to convey exactly what the
intelligence is telling us. And it's
telling us, for example, um that Putin
has no intention of doing a deal. This
is not an issue for him purely of
territory. This is about dominating uh
dominating Ukraine and turning Ukraine
into something that looks rather like uh
its neighbor, Belarus. So, all of that
stuff uh we talk to the Americans about
all the time. And I think you can see
sometimes the impact of that.
>> Vladimir Putin, if he has no intention
of doing a deal, then how do you see
this ending this At the moment, uh so I
I don't think you in under current
conditions that Putin Well, I mean I'm
basing this on, you know, access as I
had a few weeks ago to our understanding
of the intelligence on it, and that is
that he's not ready to do a deal. So,
for me, the answer to that is he needs
to be put under more pressure so he is
prepared to do a deal. The president of
Ukraine is clearly ready to do a deal.
He's remarkably in the pursuit of peace
prepared to give away up to 20% of his
country
de facto.
And yet Putin is not. So, what's going
to change that? More pressure on the
battlefield.
Ukrainians have an undercapitalized
defense industry. They have spare
capacity.
That that cash
would solve.
There is more that we can give them.
There is more that we can give them in
terms of permission to use long-range
weaponry, for example.
There's all of that as well as giving
them the sort of, you know, the basics
of air defense and all that. And there's
an opportunity to put a lot more
pressure on on Putin at home. And I
don't pretend that that is going to give
give immediate results. One of the
things I would say in this space is we
have to be patient. We have to be
prepared to see this off.
And I've talked about this including
with Bill on on that occasion that you
you gave us the quote from.
The the the just seminal importance of
this for the Western alliance that we do
not lose this contest of wills. So,
you've told me your reading of President
Putin. What about your reading of
President Trump? Why Why does he give
Putin the red carpet welcome?
>> Michelle, the wonderful thing about the
job I had the honor of doing is that we
spy
on uh
on Putin, but we don't spy on our
American allies. So, you know, I
There are other people who would be
better qualified than me to to comment
on on US politics.
>> is just about your the reading of him
from your experience, not about inside
information.
>> What Why Why does Why is he so generous
to President Putin? What I would say on
that is
I do recognize in President Trump a a
genuine commitment to peace. I mean, he
clearly finds the horrors of war as
witnessed in Ukraine or indeed in in
Gaza apparent, and he is determined to
bring it to an end. My job is to
inform my own Prime Minister and then
to, you know, discuss with the director
of CIA as I was saying, the picture we
have of of what's driving Putin. And so,
we, you know, I think there has been an
evolution of thinking in the
administration about Putin, and and
clearly Putin is is trying to play us.
You know, he's a he's an intelligence
officer, Michelle. I recognize the type.
He's he's trying to maneuver us into
into a place which is convenient for
him, and we need to
pin him down and not allow him that
maneuverability. You're painting a
picture of a still long war ahead, I
think. I I don't know, you know, that
I was paid to steal secrets, not not
solve mysteries. So, I don't know how
long it would be, but it's just so so
important that we don't lose this
contest of wills, not just because of
what that does inside Putin and other
senior Russian minds and what it might
invite in terms of opportunistic testing
of our defenses, some of which we've
seen in recent weeks, but also because
President Xi is watching this really
carefully.
And the Chinese leadership has evolved a
a sort of narrative of Western weakness
ever really ever since the international
financial crisis.
And
it there's a real danger that if if he
sees us being weak on Ukraine, then he
will draw conclusions
from that on his own behaviors around
the South China Sea and potentially on
Taiwan.
Has Have those two countries, Russia and
China, been pushed closer together by
America's actions this year? Remember
those images in Shanghai and Beijing
with Vladimir Putin and Xi Jinping
together.
And Kim Jong-un as well.
I don't think they've been pushed
together by by the US. They have been
pushed together by their
alliance around particularly around
Ukraine.
It's a very unequal arrangement, but
Putin has become increasingly
dependent on on Chinese support. And
although
I think the Chinese have not give, you
know, given the the Russians some of the
more sophisticated end of weaponry, it
is the case that they have been very
helpful with what things are called, you
know, dual use things. In other words,
things which might have a civil and a
military application. So,
the the the chemicals in those shells
are are mostly Chinese. A lot of the
components in the missile array are are
Chinese. They might I don't know, for
all I know, they might be good in a
washing machine, but they are certainly
a missile. So,
it's very clear that that Putin has
become more and more dependent. And of
course, the Iranians and the North
Koreans have also helped him out. So,
there has been a tightening of that
group of four
people to do, you know, bad stuff
together. The other day on an episode of
this podcast, I spoke to the Venezuelan
Yeah. peace laureate, Maria Corina
Machado. And
this is an ongoing situation in the
Caribbean where the US has for the last
couple of months been carrying out
strikes on boats saying that they were
drug smugglers on board.
You've grappled with so many issues of
this of this kind. You've lived through
a time of drone strikes
in places like Afghanistan. What do you
think when you look at that situation in
the Caribbean?
Well, I I really am not across it,
Michelle, and it's not, you know,
compared to some other issues and areas,
one which is in the forefront of British
interest and and things. So, I I don't
know
I genuinely don't know on what the US
are basing these strikes.
But you know, if you made the reference
to Afghanistan and to drone strikes, and
in extremis, only we would always prefer
to arrest people and put them in front
of a court, but in certain parts of the
world at certain times,
people who would do you harm,
particularly in our case terrorists, you
know, you can't reach them. And there
are bits of Somalia that that's probably
true for, and there certainly were bits
of Afghanistan in those days. And and in
extremis, you know, ministers might
authorize
a lethal operation like a drone strike
in order to remove a threat, but when
you do that, again, it has to be within
UK law, and UK law requires things to be
necessary and proportionate to the
threat posed. And there's usually a
strong It's a very legalistic word,
imminence. You know, in other words,
it's not just a threat might be vaguely
materialize in 20 years' time. It has to
feel real and now. So, that's the basis
on which we would proceed, and I really
can't comment on what's happening in
Venezuela. Can we talk closer to home
about politicians in Europe? And I'm
thinking of
two in particular who have been accused
of echoing Russian talking points on
Ukraine. And who might be perceived as
soft on Russia, who certainly face those
accusations. One is Nigel Farage, who
might be the next UK Prime Minister, and
the other is Marine Le Pen. Would you
have concerns about either of those
people being elected to those offices?
Michelle, I've spent 38 years being
devotedly non-partisan, and I will, of
course, I'm not about to throw that
habit out out of the window. My job is
very simple on this, and my job was very
simple on this, which is to give advice
based on good intelligence about what
Putin is actually intending. And that's
what I would do, and that's what my
successor will do regardless of who is
the Prime Minister of the United
Kingdom. I come back to what is the job
of the chief of MI6? It's to serve
the government of the day within the
law, obeying the obeying UK law.
And and that's what you do. You get on
with it. And you provide
truth to power. So, again, one of the
things the chief does
frequently is appear in front of the
Prime Minister and the Foreign Secretary
and sometimes tell them things they
really, really don't want to hear,
particularly if it's a Friday afternoon.
So, when you step away from all of that
as you have now, what is the
decompression like? Because what you're
describing is
I mean, it it must affect every area of
your life. I imagine you can't really do
a job like that without devoting every
probably every waking hour to it.
I didn't worry about things I couldn't
change for starters. Now, things that
thing that I would focus a lot on is is
around
our own business, the business of human
intelligence work, the, you know, of
keeping that going in a world where, you
know, the the tools of surveillance wait
to get, you know,
used against you are pretty
sophisticated. So, the thing that I
would worry most is that are we going to
stay in this game? Are we going to keep
Are we going to keep being good enough
at our methodology, our tradecraft, to
keep in this game? Are we going to get
the right technology fast enough to stay
in the game? So, is it much more about
technology than the human factor now
compared to the way you worked? It's
both. It's just not binary at all. So,
you you need great technology, and AI
helps us enormously in
interrogating vast amounts of data and
perhaps helping us to to to find
somebody who might be prepared to help
us.
At the same time,
you can see in China that that the
surveillance state is pretty well
advanced, and a lot of that technology
makes its way overseas. And so, it
doesn't have to be Beijing. You might
encounter that in Dubai or I don't know,
you know, any other
city. So, we have to be mindful We have
to be very mindful of the capabilities
that are deployed against us. So, I
worried about that. I worried about, you
know, whether we'd stay on top of the
game. I'm glad to report I think we we
are. But it's the it's a bit of an arms
race. It's a thing, you know, you have
to continue to do. And one of the
reasons I
uh decided that we needed to be a little
bit more open about ourselves and speak
about our mission a bit more was partly
because I wanted to engage uh technology
outside government because they would
often have the solutions that would help
us
um in that space. You mean the
OpenAIs and the Googles of W- all kinds
Everything everything from the really
big defense or tech companies to uh to
to the the woman doing something in her
garage uh to invent something utterly
brilliant. And both of them
actually in some ways the bigger
companies are easier to reach. We had
sort of structures for doing that. We
were clear members of their of their
teams that they could see some of the
secret stuff. But if you are a small
startup, that's not your world. And if
we were to wait and say, you know, we
need to put you through security
vetting, you know, these people start
up, make their billion, and then they go
out of business, don't they? In the time
it would take us to go through a vetting
uh process. So Did that happen? Did you
manage to do some kind of fast track?
>> we've we've done some great stuff. Um
both
uh HMGCC, which is a horrible acronym, I
apologize for it, but it is basically
our national security engineering hub.
Um you know, if you if you are a Bond
fan, I suppose it's the nearest we have
to Q Labs. Uh it sits in Milton Keynes,
and they've been much more open about
their mission and and their technology.
And you can now go to a building uh near
the Milton Keynes station and you can
literally walk in and talk about some of
the technology. That's one thing. And
the second thing a few years ago under
Alex Younger, my predecessor, we decided
to get into uh the venture capital side.
So there's a thing called the National
Security Strategic Investment Fund. And
it looks at technologies which might not
quite make it if left purely to the
commercial side. But by, if you like,
having a a a UK intelligence community
imprimatur on a particular bit of
technology, it often excites the
interest of private venture capital and
they bring in and say And we've we've
got a something like a 40% uh they call
it a pull-through rate. So of of the
technologies that are that are invested
in, 40% of them end up being used in the
organization. And that's a big change.
So what's life on the outside feel like?
Uh
you know,
I think if you're going to do these
jobs, uh you you're doing them for 5
years, and you do actually have to look
after yourself. And I had a an
extraordinary institution under me, and
you can delegate. And you know, I had
brilliant uh directors general the next
level below me in the organization, and
I could walk away and have a holiday.
Clearly if something massive uh blew up,
then you you'd come home. But but by and
large you you could do that. I'm also, I
think, a reasonably calm person. And so
I'm not a big fretter. I think you don't
want a worrier in this job. Um so for
all those reasons, uh I I haven't found,
you know, the last 6 weeks uh I think a
lot of friends are looking for me to
sort of you know, look totally
transformed, but I I don't feel that
way. I had a very nice holiday with
Maggie in in Tuscany, which we really
enjoyed. And then we came back, and I'm
sort of thinking about what I might do
next. Might that be the There's a
vacancy for ambassador in Washington. Uh
it's not uh not for me there isn't. Uh I
I wish whoever um takes on that role uh
the best of luck. And I'm sure they've
got a great candidate.
>> Why do you say it so easily? Because I
Oh, but I say it so easily because, of
course, I've given it a lot of thought
and uh made a decision. So it's easy
then, isn't But why? Um but why? Um but
because I think there are people better
qualified than me to to do the job. And
um after 5 years of a really reasonably
intensive intense job, uh I'm ready to
do some other things, including, say, a
bit more of of my grandson and um
uh and the other stuff. Richard Moore,
thank you very much. Thanks very much,
Michelle.